dear friends and followers welcome back
to my channel and lovely greetings from
this fantastic studio I'm here with Gom
du he is an absolute expert on the
airline selection process that's why
we're here today we're going to discuss
what you can expect or what the
challenges are at an airline assessment
so give us a short introduction please g
hi thank you so much Joe for making this
happen I'm very happy to be here and to
talk about Airline selection so my path
has been uh that I've been airline pilot
for about 20 years years I stopped just
after Co but so I started in around 2001
2002 when it was really hard to get a
job um after struggling through Flight
Training um I then um couldn't find a
job and so it took me a year or two I
became an instructor and then I finally
managed i p paid for my type rating
which was a fuckon 100 type rating nice
and joined a small airline in the south
of the UK which was um called EU jet it
went bankrupt after 9 months uh but that
it gave me enough jet time to uh attempt
uh the British Airway selection nice and
I got in now one thing that's important
to know in um my path is that I got a
chance at the airr selection early on
mhm and that was about a year and a half
before British Airways and this was U
very very tough on me because I prepared
for 6 months to a year in fact
altogether it was a year for a French
national um airron is a very big deal
sure so I went to their General Assembly
I collected so much information I spoke
to airron pilots and the week of my
selection air Liberty the second airline
in France in those days went
bankrupt and it was very tough it was
very tough and they debriefed me which
Fran is great with that and gave me uh
insights on what happened and told me
actually the selection had gone well but
there are times where they recruit more
than others had it been the month before
nobody knows okay the point of me saying
that is that this was traumatic to me
this was a major blow and the way I felt
is the way that I don't want anyone else
to ever have to feel again very good and
so I gathered all my forces all my
strength and became an instructor like I
said and then got my fuer 100
typewriting because I got an opportunity
MH and a year and a half after the airon
failure I was sat in a British Airways
cockpit me being a French national this
was a big success I was actually the
first French national uh to uh get a job
at British Airways after the jar
licenses came into play there were some
guys who were who who who lived all
their life in the UK uh and and who are
pilots atba before but I was first one
with a jar license coming from another
system so to say amazing okay good so
that's my path so I did 5 years on 320
two years on a Triple 7 MH going to L
haul was for me absolutely wonderful it
was for me it was I remember that first
trip to Singapore I mean it it was
wonderful and um after that I decided to
move and to go to Emirates the reason
was um that I wanted to become a Captain
earlier I was not so young anymore I was
in my the end of my 30s and I wanted
this to happen fairly quickly MH and and
um and to have better living conditions
I wasn't an English person although I I
Bri always with a great airline to work
with somehow I took the opportunity and
I went there and quickly at AMZ two
years after I joined I got the
opportunity to as a co-pilot to uh to
join the recruitment department and
there it was just an epiphany it was
like oh my God why don't they tell young
people or anyone who's going through an
assessment what's actually happening
behind the scene yeah we we're not
talking about Secrets here we're talking
about training people on what's actually
going on so they can prepare adequately
and perform at their best instead they
left guessing what the recruit is
looking for and then and and it was a
shock um I loved recruiting as much as I
loved flying and um so after that I I
got my upgrade as well good and after
getting my upgrade I stopped doing
recruitment because it was important for
me to get hours as a captain and then Co
happened and it was a long period of
reflection started and what do I really
want to do
um so I decided to go back to Europe and
created Airline selection program to
help anybody going to anline assessment
to really perform at their best um it's
important to understand how much work is
involved people underestimate that we're
going to talk about all this I'm sure uh
but this is my story essentially
wonderful um I think I want to pick up
right on there because you said that
people are unaware of what they can
expect during this assessment so can you
kind of list up the major challeng
challenges every flight student or maybe
even uh you know ready entry pilot is
facing uh during the airline selection
program absolutely so
um there are two levels of knowledge
that you need okay in order to be
successful one of them I call the
foundation and then the other part is
the surface work that you need to do
that's that's my terminology the
foundation is you understanding who is
on the other side of the table
understanding your airline m
understanding CRM operational processes
that Pilots use every day even though
you're not maybe yet a pilot maybe you
don't even have a license if you're an
abinal Cadet understanding yourself
knowing who you are compared to what is
expected understanding also a little bit
of interview technique uh in in the
sense of understanding that you're here
to sell yourself to an extent yeah and
that you need to lead with your best
foot forward always in order to perform
while still remaining of course and
being the one that you are which is an
honest person okay there is code to that
exercise in order to satisfy the
recruiter and not induce risk that
should never have been there in the
first place so that they get led into
this funnel that leads into your
recruitment yes yes yes yes
yes um and that's so that's the
foundation this Foundation uh is is the
base of our main course Advanced
interview course and that is uh uh
necessary throughout your whole career
you actually only need it once once
you've understood these Concepts it's
here forever mhm and then there is the
surface which is where most viewers who
are right now applying will know but I
thought I did prepare yes you prepared
on the surface mhm you basically went on
a website that helped you with
psychometric tests and that told you
what exactly is going to happen once you
at your selection it's very school like
to prepare like this and you have to do
it as well you need to adjust to that
Airline but knowing uh the different
exercises that you're going to be
subject to is insufficient when when you
arrive in the seat of the interview you
don't have the foundation because then
any question could become difficult yeah
and Offset you and get make you nervous
and then exactly okay so I'm not saying
don't do the the the surface work you
must do it it's you have to understand
your airline in in very much detail you
have to prepare for the psychometric
tests which in itself is tough you have
to prepare for the Sim assessment of
course which is uh very difficult MH and
you have to uh input a lot of work as
well in your CVN cover letter which is
the first thing that most people get
wrong underestimate yeah
yeah exactly uh but so it's the
combination of both that makes that
transforms the candidate absolutely now
you mentioned uh daunting now when I
remember my first Airline assessment the
most daunting part that I thought is
that I could only take the assessment
once for that specific Airline so you
basically had one chance to prove it to
everybody that you are Des that you
should uh fly for this Airline uh and
that created an incredible stress level
on top of all the AP to do test and all
of that um mention what you think of
daunting is that the only thing yeah I
think I think alline assessments are
daunting um your very first one is is
daunting and the first major alline
selection that you get through is very
daunting um it's daunting because
there's so much emotion involved yes
you've had this dream ever since you
were a child you worked hard you decided
to go on this path instead of following
regular studies maybe and you went all
in and your family supported you in this
and your friends and now you're up to
this uh selection and they can say yes
in which case you'll have the feeling
that the Universe has validated you mhm
but if they say no then now what so if
they say no most people will go like oh
I learn from this I'll gather my
thoughts I'll do better next time and if
they're lucky enough to know where they
didn't do so well maybe at the Sim
assessment for instance they'll try to
work harder and they'll try a second
time mhm but now if it was something
else that happened something that should
have been adjusted and that didn't spot
that didn't spot um then well maybe
they'll fail the second time M and
there's a very sad statistic from the
French djc it's an unofficial statistic
that we've been given but basically
um 50% of atpl holders do not renew
their professional licenses after 3
years okay okay so this means to me that
essentially people have tried once twice
or three times and comes a point a
reality sets in that where your family
your friends those who supporting you
are now telling you well maybe this is
not for you understood okay so you don't
realize this on your very first one but
however your body tells you it when you
arrive in front of the selection
building your hands will be a bit moist
yeah your heart will beat you'll feel
yeah and one of the reasons for this is
that you don't really know what they
want true you studied the best you could
but you don't really know what they want
and in particular the psychologist
scares you because you don't know what
they'll find out so it's very daunting
because there's years of dreaming as a
child as a as a as a teenager and as a
young adult M and there's much effort
and sometimes huge amounts of financial
investment and now in just a day all on
one point it all comes into one point so
it is very dating and that's why it's
important to um to arrive at this
exercise not only well prepared on the
surface but also having knowledge and
being happy to come and display uh what
you can do and knowing that actually you
can pretty much answer any question they
throw at you I kind of want to compare
it to a World Cup Final in the football
and you have the penalty and you have to
shoot that goal and that's the pressure
the level of pressure you through now
when I did my first actually it wasn't
really my first Airline assessment so uh
I went to airberlin but I really wanted
to go to this airine and what I did
beforehand is that I went to an airline
assessment that an airline I wasn't too
interested in I just kind of wanted to
see what a selection process is like is
that something you would recommend to
somebody who says look I have the
opportunity to go to potentially two
Airlines one of them is the one that I
really want to go to and the other one
is just for for testing purposes is that
something you would suggest I think
think that if you have an airline that
you want to go for that you shouldn't
delay okay you know um you there's a
major airline in your country that is
your dream don't delay because you don't
know what's going to happen in the
economy in six months and anytime that
you waste now is time that you will lose
ins seniority true okay but uh
essentially it will it will probably
work out the way that you just said
because a major airline will take a bit
more time to hire you so you'll have the
time to squeeze some other assessments
um in the meantime but what's important
is that if you didn't succeed that you
know where you went wrong and well um
our clients who go through our course
they kind of know because they have the
decoding keys and so they'll know I
didn't do well at the group interview
yeah I I was quiet for for too long or
at some point I I kind of wasn't quick
enough here and they'll know if you know
it's reassuring if you don't know you go
to the next one still in this in this
sort of doubt and that's that's terrible
because now you you'll lose what's most
important to a pilot whether it's an an
assessment on the airplane which is your
confidence yeah right yes absolutely
absolutely um now just speaking of
numbers a few minutes ago you said 50%
of the people that have the at kind of
lose their license because they don't
continue for they don't renew after
three years so they they yeah so you are
basically saying already 50% of all the
flight students that are coming out of
flight school don't find a job or don't
fail the assessments that's that's
that's what the statistic uh induces us
to believe now um typically and
historically of course on this one
there's no official statistic but uh at
major airline selection so on these I
would include also major lowcost
airlines basically uh airlines that have
a quite strict and well regulated well
regimented um assessment process
typically
25% uh of applicants would succeed at
any selection okay so this would mean
that 75% of those who come here and
let's let's let's assume now let's let's
talk about what we call in France
professionals which would be typically
in in in English speaking World um um
license CPL license holders people
who've been through Flight Training now
who are uh basically direct entry
britishway will call them for instance
so in the case of direct entry that's
where the statistics of 25% will apply
so you're telling me now that we have
fully license pilots and then 75% of
those would not be suited for that
Airline this figure is way too low
okay uh so um our clients when they go
through our training this rate increases
by a factor of three sometimes more
depending on the airline when the those
who uh when those 25 when applicants
basically prepare adequately this rate
goes up from 25 to 75 and more and the
reason is they understand the exercise
so this led us to to come up to the
conclusion that there are three
categories of candidates in our mind
okay there is the 25% who tend to always
succeed first of all they are smart but
everybody's smart at this point okay so
they are smart but they also understand
the recruiter and they do so sort of
naturally they understand how the game
is played they have it they are they
have a there there's a sales site to
them that comes naturally across and
that is well received whatever the
selection they go to also these are hard
workers okay not everybody who's got a
license works hard and understand how
much work you need to put in to to to
get through that L hurdle you know a lot
of people under underestimate the size
of this mountain so they understand all
that they work hard and one of the
reasons by the way where our success
rates are very high is that we whatever
clients get on our program usually
because they have to spend they are
motivated they work hard and they get
the well-deserved result that comes with
it uh so there's this 25% then you've
got another 50% those 50% of candidates
they are perfectly able candidates just
as smart just as quick they just don't
understand what the recruiters is
looking for they kind of lose their
confidence in front of the recruiter and
they end up um volunteering mistakes
that don't belong in the interview room
they end up trapping themselves sliding
on the banana pill they put in front of
their um in front of themselves which
leavs the recruit to ask more questions
and then they're in the ropes and then
they could they could uh end end up on a
knockout which which is a real shame and
then there's the other 25 which are
candidates who yes maybe they'll be a
bit less quick maybe uh there's more of
a problem there then these ones to
succeed they'll have to have good market
conditions and maybe a connection and
you maybe not everyone can succeed but
um those 25% the first ones they will
succeed almost every time maybe they are
nooky they want those in the 50% are the
ones we can really help the thing is you
don't know in which quadrant you are
yeah so those we really can help and we
see it every day people gaining
confidence going usually some people
meet us right away good for them some
people meet us after a failure they
don't want to have that same pain that
that we know how it feels it's terrible
and they don't want to feel that again
and these you you can see after a bit of
work there a real transformation in
their approach and then we do a repeat
interview with them and then we go yeah
this person is ready Fant not the same
person not the same
presentation very well said I like it
yes okay good all right in uh Germany we
have lansa and uh it is one of their
let's say their selection process is
very well known in the sense sense of a
lot of people know that the fail rate is
really really high because you have to
pass the DLR test um can you let us in
or give us sort of specific details let
say British Airways Emirates Etc that
you know of you'll the emotion you'll
feel when you get into that marline
selection will be times two or times
three compared to any other selection
and if you would fail which was my case
at my first one the a frence one the
scar that it left on me is still there I
still think about it believe it or not
almost every day okay because every day
I see an FR plane every day I talk to
someone who's going to enter air front
and I'm happy for them of course but
this SC is still there this is the SC
that I don't want others to carry all in
all uh we want to avoid this car also
because you're not going to get that
many opportunities how many do you know
how many there are at Lanza if you fail
once can you can you go again no that's
a one time so Lanza is a one time that's
very tough um at British Airways I I
don't remember but I think also it's a
one time maybe I'm wrong in that I I
think I think it's one or twice at air
front you can go up to three times oh
wow okay but they will be spaced out so
they tell you it's uh uh two years but
then two years before you can put in the
file and then uh in today's market so
2024 right now it's very quick 6 to9
months in my times it was three years
three years before you get invited at
the interview and then a year before
before you get in so you're talking
about a massive delay uh between between
each attempt sorry guys this is the end
of part one of our interview series
insights of an airline pilots recruiter
thank you for watching part one and I
hope you found this conversation
insightful here you'll find the link to
the second video of this series looking
forward to seeing you there and don't
forget a good pilot is always learning
wishing you all the best you're Captain
Joe